[metal] Implement a Metal HAL driver (#12713)
openxla/iree: experimental/metal/README.md

Reviewer: Love this README, thanks!

# IREE Metal HAL Driver

This document lists technical details regarding the Metal HAL driver. Note that

> the Metal HAL driver is working in progress and experimental; this document is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the Metal HAL driver is a work in progress and experimental; this document is
```

dispatch and transfer during its lifetime. In the future we expect to spport
multiple queues for better concurrency.

#### Command buffer submission

In IREE HAL, command buffers are directly created from the `iree_hal_device_t`.
It's also directly submitted there via `iree_hal_device_queue_execute()`.
Each execution takes a batch of command buffers, together with a list of waiting
`iree_hal_semaphore_t`s and a list signaling `iree_hal_semaphore_t`s.
There is no direct mapping of such structure in Metal; so we performs the submission
in three steps:

1.  Create a new `MTLCommandBuffer` to `encodeWaitForEvent:value` for all
    waiting `iree_hal_semaphore_t`s and commit this command buffer.
1.  Commit all command buffers in the submmision batch.
1.  Create a new `MTLCommandBuffer` to `encodeSignalEvent:value` for all
    signaling `iree_hal_semaphore_t`s and commit this command buffer.

Such submission enables asynchronous execution of the workload on the GPU.

#### Queue-ordered allocation

Queue-ordered asynchronous allocations via `iree_hal_device_queue_alloc` is not fully
supported yet; it just translates to blocking wait and allocation.

#### Collectives

> Collectives suppport is unimplemented yet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Collectives suppport is not yet implemented.
```

exception. A listener is registered on the `MTLSharedEvent` with
`notifyListener:atValue:block:` to singal a semaphore to wake the current
thread, which is put into sleep by waiting on the semaphore.

### Allocator

At the moment the Metal HAL driver just has a very simple
[`iree_hal_allocator_t`][hal-allocator] implementation. It just wraps a `MTLDevice`
and redirects all allocation requests to the `MTLDevice`. No page/pool/slab or
whatever. This is meant to be used together with common allocator layers like the
caching allocator.

### Buffer

IREE [`iree_hal_buffer_t`][hal-buffer] maps Metal `MTLBuffer`. See
[Memory Management](#memory-management) for more details.

### Executable

IREE [`iree_hal_executable_t`][hal-executable] represents a GPU program archive with
a driver-defined format. It maps naturally to Metal [`MTLLibrary`][mtl-library].
An entry point in a `MTLLibrary` is a [`MTLFunction`][mtl-function]. We define
[`iree_hal_metal_kernel_params_t`][metal-kernel-library] to wrap around a
`MTLLibrary`, its `MTLFunction`s, and also `MTLComputePipelineState` objects
constructed from `MTLFunction`s.

### Executable cache

> IREE [`iree_hal_executable_cache_t`][hal-executable-cache] is modelling a cache of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
IREE [`iree_hal_executable_cache_t`][hal-executable-cache] is modeling a cache of
```

preprared GPU executables for a particular device. At the moment the Metal

> HAL driver does not peforming any cache on GPU programs; it simply reads the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
HAL driver does not peforming any caching of GPU programs; it simply reads the
```
